The Big Trip Up Yonder
By Kurt Vonnegut

Gramps Ford, his chin resting on his hands, his hands on the crook of his cane, was staring irascibly at the five-foot television screen that dominated the room. On the screen, a news commentator was summarizing the day's happenings. Every thirty seconds or so, Gramps Ford would jab the floor with his cane-tip and shout, "Hell, we did that a hundred years ago!"

Emerald and Lou, coming in from the balcony, where they had been seeking that 2185 A.D. rarity—privacy—were obliged to take seats in the back row, behind six sulking great-great-grandchildren and thirty-eight other Fords.

Ford automobiles had been produced by the family since 1903 A.D., though none had been made since 1951. But now, as then, the Fords were a powerful clan, who stuck together, and who were as proud as they were rich.

Gramps Ford was eighty-three, but like all other Americans his age, thanks to anti-gerasone, he looked much younger. He looked, in fact, forty-two years old, though he acted sixty-three.

His hair was thick and black, his skin firm and unwrinkled, his step was quick and sure, and most importantly, he was as fertile as he had been at twenty-five.

The anti-gerasone, which was putting such a strain on the Ford family's finances, had been discovered in 1924. It was a by-product of the development of the atomic bomb. Anti-gerasone stopped the aging process and made men and women fertile for life. Its immediate advantage was that it made the American people the youngest-looking, most fertile people on Earth.

Its ultimate disadvantage was that it made death, for all practical purposes, voluntary, and had multiplied America's population by 8.7 since 1925.

This had been a wonderful thing for the Ford family for the first twenty years. The Fords had bred like rabbits, and by 1945 there were 214 of them. But now, as Americans continued to breed and consume, natural resources were becoming precious. The government was paying people to take anti-gerasone.

The punishment for not taking it was simple: you were kicked out of the family.

This was why, at the age of one hundred and twelve, Gramps Ford was still vital and virile.

Lou Ford, who was twenty-two, was one of the newer additions to the family. He wasn't sure he wanted to be one of the Fords, but his wife Emerald, who was also twenty-two, had been born a Ford, and had been taking anti-gerasone all her life.

"God!" she whispered to Lou, "Listen to Gramps carry on."

"He's not going to die, is he?" asked Lou.

"Are you crazy?" said Emerald. "He's got anti-gerasone enough for a hundred more years. He's just crabby because he's got to live with all these people."

Gramps heard them whispering and turned around. "You two!" he shouted. "Shut up or get out. This is a family meeting, and we're trying to decide something important."

They shut up.

Gramps faced the television again. The news commentator was saying that the population of the United States had just passed the 800-million mark, and that new laws were being proposed by Congress to deal with the crisis.

"We need room!" Gramps said to the television. "Tell 'em that!"

Lou frowned. There had been some discussion in the Ford family about sending some of the younger members to Mars, which had been opened for colonization, but Gramps had vetoed the idea. Gramps said that splitting up the family would be the end of the Fords.

"The way I see it," Gramps said to the assembly, "there are too many people and not enough room. Something's got to be done about it."

"What are you getting at, Gramps?" asked Emerald's father, Herman, a spry eighty-year-old.

"I'm getting at this," said Gramps. "We Fords are important people. We've been important for more than a century. We're not going to let ourselves get squeezed out by a lot of riff-raff."

Lou looked around the room at the other Fords. There were forty-three of them present, ranging in age from Gramps's one hundred and twelve years down to five-year-old Mortimer, who was playing with blocks on the floor.

All were in good health, and all looked as though they were between twenty-five and forty years old, though their actual ages varied by almost a century. All were intelligent and well-educated, having had plenty of time to learn things. None was a burden on the others. None was unloved.

But, Lou thought to himself, there were an awful lot of them to have around all the time.

"Now, then," said Gramps, "here's what I propose we do. I think we should build another house."

"Another house!" said several Fords at once.

"Where?" said Herman.

"In Pennsylvania," said Gramps. "I've found a beautiful piece of land near Gettysburg. Four hundred acres."

"That's a lot of money, Gramps," said Herman.

"We can afford it," said Gramps. "We're rich."

"But who would live there?" asked Emerald.

"That's what we've got to decide," said Gramps. "We can't all live in one house forever. We've got to split up sometime."

The room fell silent. Lou sensed that this was a subject that had been discussed before, and that it made all the Fords uneasy.

"What do you think, Lou?" asked Gramps, suddenly turning to him.

Lou was startled. It was the first time Gramps had ever asked for his opinion on anything important.

"Well," said Lou, "I think it might be a good idea. I mean, we are getting pretty crowded here."

"That's what I thought you'd say," said Gramps. "You're practical, like all the young ones. You're not sentimental about keeping the family together."

"Now, wait a minute, Gramps," said Herman. "I'm not against progress, but—"

"But you're against splitting up the family," Gramps finished for him. "Well, let me tell you something, Herman. We're going to split whether we want to or not. If we don't do it ourselves, the government will do it for us."

"What do you mean?" asked Emerald.

"I mean that the government is going to start passing laws about how many people can live in one house," said Gramps. "They're already talking about it. Pretty soon, they'll be telling us we can only have so many children, and that we can only live in houses of a certain size."

Lou thought about this. It seemed possible. The government had been passing more and more laws about population control lately.

"So," Gramps continued, "I think we should take the initiative. I think we should decide for ourselves how to split up the family, instead of letting the government decide for us."

"Who would go to Pennsylvania?" asked Herman.

"The young ones," said Gramps. "Lou and Emerald, and maybe some of the others. The ones who are just starting out."

Lou felt a thrill of excitement. The idea of living in his own house, away from all these relatives, was appealing.

But Emerald didn't look happy. "I don't want to leave," she said. "I've lived here all my life."

"You'll adjust," said Gramps. "Young people always do."

"What about the anti-gerasone?" asked Lou. "If we move away, how will we get it?"

"The government will provide it," said Gramps. "They have to. It's the law."

"But what if something happens to you?" asked Emerald. "What if the family needs to stick together?"

"Nothing's going to happen to me," said Gramps. "I'm going to live for a long time yet. And when I do die, the family will go on. That's what families do."

The room was quiet again. Lou could see that the other Fords were thinking about what Gramps had said.

Finally, Herman spoke up. "I think Gramps is right," he said. "We do need to think about the future. And maybe it would be good for some of the young ones to have their own place."

"Thank you, Herman," said Gramps. "I knew you'd see it my way eventually."

"But we'd still be Fords," said Emerald. "We'd still be family."

"Of course," said Gramps. "Distance doesn't change blood. You'll always be a Ford, no matter where you live."

Lou reached over and took Emerald's hand. "It might be nice," he said. "To have our own place, I mean."

Emerald looked at him and smiled. "Maybe," she said. "Maybe it would."

"Then it's settled," said Gramps. "Lou and Emerald will go to Pennsylvania, and anyone else who wants to can go with them."

"How many can go?" asked one of the younger Fords.

"As many as want to," said Gramps. "The house will be big enough."

"How big?" asked Herman.

"Big enough," said Gramps. "I'm having it designed by the best architects. It'll have everything this house has, and more."

Lou felt a surge of happiness. His own house! His own life! It seemed almost too good to be true.

"When will it be ready?" he asked.

"Next year," said Gramps. "Maybe sooner if we're lucky."

"And in the meantime?" asked Emerald.

"In the meantime, we go on as we always have," said Gramps. "We're still a family, and we'll always be a family. But we'll be a family with two houses instead of one."

The meeting broke up soon after that, with most of the Fords going off to discuss the news among themselves. Lou and Emerald went back out on the balcony.

"Are you really happy about this?" Emerald asked.

"Yes," said Lou. "I think I am. Aren't you?"

"I'm scared," said Emerald. "I've never lived anywhere but here. I don't know if I can do it."

"Sure you can," said Lou. "We'll do it together."

They stood at the railing, looking out at the city. In the distance, they could see other apartment buildings, all of them crowded with people. The population problem was getting worse every year, and Lou knew that Gramps was right about one thing: something had to be done.

"Do you think we'll be happy?" asked Emerald.

"I think we'll be happier than we would be if we stayed here," said Lou. "We need room to grow, Emerald. We need space to be ourselves."

"But what if we have children? Where will they live?"

"They'll live with us," said Lou. "In our house. Our big house."

Emerald smiled. "It does sound nice when you put it that way."

"It will be nice," said Lou. "You'll see."

They talked for a while longer, making plans and dreaming about their new life. When they finally went back inside, most of the other Fords had gone to bed.

But Gramps was still awake, sitting in his chair and staring at the television. The news was still on, and the commentator was still talking about the population crisis.

"Good night, Gramps," said Lou.

"Good night, boy," said Gramps, without taking his eyes off the screen. "Sweet dreams."

Lou and Emerald went to their room, which they shared with two of Emerald's cousins. As they got ready for bed, Lou thought about what the future might hold.

He was twenty-two years old, and thanks to anti-gerasone, he would look twenty-two for the rest of his life. He had centuries ahead of him, and now he would have his own house to live them in.

It seemed like a pretty good deal.

But as he lay in bed, listening to the breathing of his sleeping relatives, Lou wondered if there was a catch somewhere. There always seemed to be a catch when things looked too good to be true.

In the morning, he told himself, he would start making plans for the move to Pennsylvania. But tonight, he would just enjoy the thought of having his own space at last.

It had been a long time coming, but finally, Lou Ford was going to have room to breathe.